This article was inspired from [mobile web](http://lilly.tumblr.com/post/38236111289/the-mobile-web) — a post from John Lilly, the former CEO of Mozilla. It's also known that Mozilla is going to launch a mobile app market for its Firefox OS phone in 2013 — so we can see a bit more "of the web" in the phone scene. But the web part that John and others are looking is not a specific subject of the infra-structure to build web apps (what Mozilla promotes now). It is a concern and the fact we compare web apps with web pages – we tend to miss the web the way we learned about it.  

* Draft - 21 Dec 2012

## It's not a network — period

John mentioned about a web that is not exactly there in the mobile scene: "the utility of being able to do things in a networked way, with other people, connected all the time, and being able to mash up stuff from one place into another".

And that web was truly different: it used to be formed incredibly fast in terms of links between resources. Back in 1996, Netscape founder Jim Barksdale [talked about a network effect](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wgufqTgsPsI). Jim asked "what is going on here?" and explained why things were scaling so fast. He argues that the value of a network increases when you have ubiquity: "fast networks grows once people believe: I gotta be in the network or I am gonna be left out." And he jokes about a salesman trying to sell the first telephone in a world with no other phones. 

## Why users are using silos with no network 

Now smartphones are reaching out at a global scale, so there is ubiquity in user's recognition that a smartphone is for everyone. But this is certainly not the browser even if we try to put a browser infra-structure very close to the user interface – what Mozilla is doing. We can tell a story that it is the web but it's not the same web unveiled to users first via NSCA Mosaic.  

We recognize that cellphones scaled from a conversation tool to something else that could also reach out to the magic of the web. And it feels good because it does not break since it is an online and offline experience. And it fits well in our pockets and our lives — it is good as we can switch modes — I want a phone for maps, calls, friends, updates, and to participate in specific discussions. So if there is a network it's not related to the infra-structure — it's in us and the glue that connects everything is through our conversations — so not a glue in the network as pages used to enable.

The current mobile web is very active but not as active in forming premisses thus forming conclusions (or networked acessible resources) in the way it used to do such as a web page used to be formed with links. Results of interactions are not exactly annotated out there in the wild and might be restricted to app silos or closed networks.  

## Network silos boosting conversations

And the index is manual right? I mean we are not searching to find things that were indexed from a web with hyperlinks. Instead, all devices have something at your door, a market which is hand written — crafted. 

So it was the same way when it all started with the web —think Yahoo! and things like Dmoz.org — an index maintaned by editors at Netscape. But then it comes the question which is how can an index or system act to help users to map the network? If we have manually written indexes is because there is indeed something blocking our way. Now the tricky thing is that the story sticks — users can understand explanations given by markets: you can trust our apps and they are ranked by people – it does not matter that it is a lot of hand work  — it might even sound better for users now. The insecure side of the Web helped everyone to live a bit worried about these things and to be prepared to accept markets and trusted doors knowing that apps can do things that are intimate with us — such as finding our position using the GPS. 

## Web apps, web pages and browser add-ons

A lot of people tend to make a comparison between a web app and a web page so I wanted to go back a bit and search for things before web apps and after web pages. And in that space I found the first generation of Add-ons in the Mozilla space — browser extensions. I think add-ons were something else — they were not web apps as we have today but folks bended the reality to tried to make them towards web apps. But what was an extension when it all started? 

An extension was a way to modify a page — to bend the web's reality for a user's benefit. It was magical and developers could change sites — things like filtering only images, fetching videos, blocking pop-ups and so on. And no automatic index right? I mean the market is almost hand written, crafted — so it was the same way when it all started for pages — let's think Yahoo! and things like Dmoz.

But then it comes the question which is how can an index or system act to help users to map the network? If we have manually written indexes is because there is indeed something blocking our way. Now the tricky thing is that the story zsticks — so there is ubiquity from the user's point of view: they respect the explanation markets are saying: you can trust the apps, the apps are ranked – it does not matter that it is a lot hand made — it might even sound better for users now. The insecure side of the Web helped everyone to live a bit worried about these things. 

Let's take a first generation of Add-ons in the Mozilla space — add-ons, a kind of first generation of web apps if you will, used to be posted in any site. Then Mozilla created the index, manually reviewed, and things became organized but yet people were able to modify the web — to exercise a bit the re-writable web — it was magic to be able to "fix a problem with the bank site" and to do things "on behalf of the users". The top add-ons in the Mozilla space were things that could change sites — things like filtering only images, fetching videos, blocking pop-ups and so on. 

## Historical recap

Mozdev.org served well as the very first (developer recognized) index for Mozilla add-ons. It was the birthplace for ideas like the [Banner blind](http://bannerblind.mozdev.org/) an ad removal add-on. And experimental projects like [Macrozilla](http://macrozilla.mozdev.org/) a project to let developers modify page behavior running scripts on top of pages. 

But things grow and recognition and user intimacy are indicators for scaling things, so a market place in the Mozilla space was written, [Addons.mozilla.org](http://addons.mozilla.org). Now we pick add-ons written with the new Mozilla SDK and what we get there is a new story: ergonomics for developers and it's an infra-structure that can help the index to be more of a right thing under the safe, secure, and controlled approach — so a plain SDK-written add-on won't make much things like top 5% add-ons used to do — exercise the transformational web. 

Plain add-ons are more locked — in a way similar to what mobile web apps can do — they ask for permissions and the index know about it. On the mobile it's the intent model so what you get is a lot of apps asking permissions to exercise the "copy and paste" — it supports and index and the index will say that it is safer. 

So what is left to these apps are basically to deal with remote sources and the sources they can deal - most cases their trusted domains. This effect started with the Addons in the Mozilla space and it is common to see with mobile apps over the markets — apps are tunnels to a very specific rabbit hole. There is ubiquity if we ask users – they are all going towards this story. But there is no networked ubiquity so a level that a third-party index can do its work with the network itself — and mostly because things are not hyperlinked with a ranking model that supports it. And even worse is that many of us are worring that the ranking model is not the same anymore and that a traditional index (think Google) is not as good.

But a question that comes is how to map the relationships to restablish a web that could be ranked and mapped. And I think is worth looking why people do links to pages and what pushes them to do it. 

Hyperlinks are cool because they served as a way to help us write less — we add evidence, exampes, references and we do it inline. Going back to Netscape navigator Gold Edition — we had an editor in it. Page writters were initially from universities and they knew how to write bibliographic references — so they did in the new way. And this was a model between a written book and the spoken world. Web pages allowed us to establish something between a speech and scientific article. And the search engine was the marketplace for us to find all. 

Now intents are not hyperlinks but it certainly boosts web conversations. We have now much more videos, documents, and web artifacts but they are growing in a vertical approach. There is a certain a grid of pilars going on — a list of best TVs, a list of beautiful flowers, follow my dance steps, misheard lyrics — it's an exercise that helped us to modify things but to keep references – just like developers can write lines of code in a repository and they can look back — a pilar, a construction. From the values we have today I see recognition that won't be modified but that any person can reply to the web if they are using specific agents to this expression — web services and web apps. 

But in what layer we need to look at to build this network? Can we make web pages become apps? Or simply the generated results from apps are going to be pages with links to other resources and apps too — a mark from the editor goes along with results? It's difficult because it not one network anymore — we have many now. The grid of service pilars is like saying that everyone (all mobile users) is now using a editor — they are producting web artifacts but they are producing speciallized artifacts — an image, a statement over twitter, a map annotation. They are producing the links only, not the text around things. And the reason it works is because they are producing these links in a context — think that a twitter tag in an event is the context — the calling voice, the claim. The links are the statements, primisses that are intended to support things. This is a conversation and this is an article but the problem we have to deal now is how to "crawll" these things. And it is big because a lot of these pilars are under closed networks — think a discussion that goes on in facebook or the permissions you need to capture real-time twitter discussions. 

So we are failing to capture discussions in the pilars which prevents us from making a web between these resources. And on the other hand the editor it at our ands — and editors won't exactly comply with the crawling rules too — so think about the days Flash was going up stream — a proprietary editor with an incentive — animation — and they helped the web to be closed and indexes failed to reach out to them. Now it is a bit of that in our hands in our mobile — flashing things down the tunnel — to not say a toiled because I feel we may still find a light in there. 

